---
title: "GYM 100: A Preface"
tags:
- gym rat behavior
---

I got a little bored of writing about credit cards and personal finance, so I decided to
switch it up... and start a new blog series about the next tech bro topic: the gym.
[^1]

There really isn't a strict focus or prescriptive guidance in this specific post,
but I'll plan on writing more of those thoughts in future topics. 
This is just an introduction for now.

[^1]: I still have so much more to yap about finances. Investing, taxes, etc. Lol I'm a nerd.

### The Gym Series
I wanted to come up with a series title to help structure and group related posts 
together, but couldn't come up with anything inspiring. There are tags built into
Jekyll, but I think titling works out a bit better. 

I tried asking ChatGPT for title suggestions:
- Sweat Chronicles by James Qiu: The Journey to a Healthier You
- Pump Progress with James Qiu: Sculpting Your Body, One Rep at a Time
- Flex Files: James Qiu Navigates the Gym Terrain

I'll pass on these. Generated by the hottest new tech by the way LOL. 
For now, I'll structure it as a throw back to how UW structured their course titles
back when I was in university for now.
> \<ACRONYM\> \<NUMBER\> : \<TITLE\>.  

### Why Gym?
I won't bore you with a detailed list of benefits; a quick Google search can provide that.

Not limited to these, here are my personal top reasons:
- Enhances physical strength and health
- Builds confidence and a sense of accomplishment
- Boosts mental energy the rest of your day
- Provides opportunities to spot my boy Bradley on the squat :blush:

On a serious note, incorporating the gym into your lifestyle, 
even if it's just once or twice a week, is worthwhile.

However, the *most* crucial aspect about the gym is actually going.
What good are its benefits if you never go?

### About Me
I've been lifting about 3 years, ever since January 2021 (peak Zoom University era).
When I first started lifting, I was super skinny. I was 110 pounds, at 5' 8".
Could barely bench or squat the bar my first time (we all start somewhere).

I had never really touched weights before. 
Up to high school, I played plenty of sports:
cross country, soccer, track, tennis, etc. For those sports, I just never really
needed the physicality as much so I just never bothered. 

Then in college... well I'm a Computer Science major who never touched grass my first 3 years 
in college. The heaviest things I had to carry in university were my CS project teammates
(which admittedly can get heavy at times).

So in early 2021, my friends[^2] started dragging me out to lift each day.
After each workout (which would be daily), we would alternate
between feasting on Man vs. Fries, McDonalds, Taco Bell. 
The amount of food we ate was unholy[^3]. I miss those days.
Within 6 months, I weighted 150 pounds (a 36% bodyweight increase). Lol.

Ever since then, going to the gym has become a daily habit. Definitely
had to cut down on the eating from my beginning years.

[^2]: Golden era of lifting. Thanks Pman, Camden, Britnie :heart:
[^3]: 1 Big Mac, 1 Filet of Fish, 1 McChicken, 1 McDouble, 20 chicken nuggets, 1 large fry. Yep, I one manned that entire order in one sitting. And I had dinner already that night :skull:.

Now, at the time of this blog post, I weigh a consistent 136 pounds. 
But my lifts are *a lot* stronger than when I first started.

My numbers are nothing super crazy, but met my initial beginner goals.
I bench 165lbs 5x5, deadlift 255 5x5, front squat 225 5x5.
I never really max (going for the absolutely heaviest weight), and I'm
training for a 5K now at the time of writing this which is why I'm a bit lighter.
Now, I'm not really bulking or cutting, just chilling.

### Personal Gym Philosophy
Everyone views the gym differently. There are many different (and valid)
motivations, goals, and training approaches to the gym.

Here's my gym philosophy I've formed:
- Keep the majority of your workouts simple and foundational
- Avoid injury, listen to your body, and prioritize health
- Consistency consistency consistency
- Progress is proportional to the work you put in (or steroids)
- Always rerack your weight and wipe down your equipment

You'll definitely see me repeat these themes in later posts.

### Closing Thoughts
In my opinion, I've developed a solid gym philosophy that's proven effective in reaching some of my personal goals over the last 3 years. 
From a skinny start, to a still skinny present day me, I guess I haven't come too too far :laughing:, but you get my point. 
In future posts, we'll go into specific gym topics, offering practical suggestions and delving into the underlying reasons for each.

You can view fitness as a system of three components: nutrition, exercise, and genetics. You can really only control the first two things, so you should apply an effective approach to what you can control. Developing that approach involves identifying what works, understanding the underlying reasons for success, and forming a strategy that optimizes around those principles. Often, these principles tie back to basic concepts in psychology, nutritional science, and the need to see your friend get over a brutal breakup.
